# Managing UI State

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/01.md`

## Background

Normally an interactive application will need to hold state somewhere. In React,
you use special functions called "hooks" to do this. Common built-in hooks
include:

- `React.useState`
- `React.useEffect`
- `React.useContext`
- `React.useRef`
- `React.useReducer`

Each of these is a special function that you can call inside your custom React
component function to store data (like state) or perform actions (or
side-effects). There are a few more built-in hooks that have special use cases,
but the ones above are what you'll be using most of the time.

Each of the hooks has a unique API. Some return a value (like `React.useRef` and
`React.useContext`), others return a pair of values (like `React.useState` and
`React.useReducer`), and others return nothing at all (like `React.useEffect`).

Here's an example of a component that uses the `useState` hook and an onClick
event handler to update that state:

```jsx
function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(count + 1)
  return <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
}
```

`React.useState` is a function that accepts a single argument. That argument is
the initial state for the instance of the component. In our case, the state will
start as `0`.

`React.useState` returns a pair of values. It does this by returning an array
with two elements (and we use destructuring syntax to assign each of those
values to distinct variables). The first of the pair is the state value and the
second is a function we can call to update the state. We can name these
variables whatever we want. Common convention is to choose a name for the state
variable, then prefix `set` in front of that for the updater function.

State can be defined as: data that changes over time. So how does this work over
time? When the button is clicked, our `increment` function will be called at
which time we update the `count` by calling `setCount`.

When we call `setCount`, that tells React to re-render our component. When it
does this, the entire `Counter` function is re-run, so when `React.useState` is
called this time, the value we get back is the value that we called `setCount`
with. And it continues like that until `Counter` is unmounted (removed from the
application), or the user closes the application.

ðŸ“œ To get a deeper dive on how React keeps track of hooks, read/watch this great
post/talk by [Shawn Wang](https://twitter.com/swyx):
[Getting Closure on Hooks](https://www.swyx.io/getting-closure-on-hooks/)

ðŸ“œ And here's a reference to
[the hooks official documentation](https://reactjs.org/hooks).

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/01.tsx)
- [Final](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.tsx)

This exercise should be familiar if you've been through the
[React Fundamentals](https://github.com/kentcdodds/react-fundamentals) workshop
already. Rather than retrieving the value of the input out of the
`form.elements`, we're going to keep track of the value in a state variable
called `username` and when the user submits the form we'll be able to simply
submit that variable.

The benefits of this approach will become apparent in the extra credit. We just
want to get you going on using the `React.useState` hook for the exercise.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ Initialize state

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-1.tsx)

Make the `UsernameForm` accept a prop called `initialUsername` and initialize
the `username` state to that value. (Remember, the value you pass to the
`React.useState` call will be the initial value).

Go ahead and test it out by updating the `App` component to pass an
`initialUsername` prop along. The test will automatically detect when you've
added the `initialUsername` prop to your component and it can also validate
you've got things working properly as well.

### 2. ðŸ’¯ Derived state for validation

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-2.tsx)

All state can be classified into two buckets:

- **Managed State:** State that you need to explicitly manage (via
  `React.useState` for example)
- **Derived State:** State that you can calculate based on other state

Not all state needs to be stored, some of it can be derived. For example, let's
say that you have a basket of stuffed animals and your state is:

```tsx
const koalaCount = 4
const owlCount = 6
```

As stuffed animals are added and removed, you need to update those values. But
let's say you want to display a total count of all stuffed animals in the
basket. Do you need to manage that state separately? We definitely could, but we
don't need to (and we shouldn't). You can derive that value from the managed
state that you already have. Add the `koalaCount` and the `owlCount` together
and you get the total.

We have lots of state like this in applications and deriving state can help us
avoid state synchronization bugs. For more on this, read
[Don't Sync State. Derive It!](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/dont-sync-state-derive-it).

For this extra credit, we're going to add some validation. We want to validate
the user's input and display an error message if they get something wrong. Here
are the rules:

1. If username is not all lower-case, display: `'Username must be lower case'`
2. If username is less than 3 characters, display:
   `'Username must be at least 3 characters long'`
3. If username is more than 10 characters, display:
   `'Username must be no longer than 10 characters'`

And finally, if the user clicks "submit" we don't want to call
`onSubmitUsername` unless the input is valid.

ðŸ’° There are plenty of ways to do this, but as a hint, here are some of the
variables I make in my solution:

- `usernameIsLowerCase`: derived from the `username`
- `usernameIsLongEnough`: derived from the `username`
- `usernameIsShortEnough`: derived from the `username`
- `formIsValid`: derived from `usernameIsLowerCase`, `usernameIsLongEnough`, and
  `usernameIsShortEnough`
- `errorMessage`: derived from `usernameIsLowerCase`, `usernameIsLongEnough`,
  and `usernameIsShortEnough`

So some derived state can be derived from other state!

And then in the `handleSubmit` I check the `formIsValid` value before calling
`onSubmitUsername`.

Display the error message in a `div` with `role="alert"` so screen readers will
read the message. (ðŸ“œ
[learn more on mdn](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_alert_role)).
And you can make it `red` too use the `style` prop just for fun.

### 3. ðŸ’¯ Improve error UX

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-3.tsx)

I don't know about you, but having an error message yelling at me before I've
had a chance to fill out the field is really annoying.

### 4. ðŸ’¯ Improve error accessibility for screen readers

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks-next.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-4.tsx)

TODO: fill this in

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=01%3A%20Managing%20UI%20State&em=).
